Using Large Language Models to Assign
Partial Credit to Students' Explanations of
Problem-Solving Process: Grade at Human
Level Accuracy with Grading Confidence
Index and Personalized Student-facing
Feedback
Zhongzhou Chen* and Tong Wan
Department of Physics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida 32816, USA

ABSTRACT.
This study examines the feasibility and potential advantages of using large language models, in particular GPT-4o, to
perform partial credit grading of large numbers of student written responses to introductory level physics problems.
Students were instructed to write down verbal explanations of their reasoning process when solving one conceptual
and two numerical calculation problems on in class exams. The explanations were then graded according to a 3-item
rubric with each item grades as binary (1 or 0). We first demonstrate that machine grading using GPT-4o with no
examples nor reference answer can reliably agree with human graders on 70%-80% of all cases, which is equal to or
higher than the level at which two human graders agree with each other. Two methods are essential for achieving this
level of accuracy: 1. Adding explanation language to each rubric item that targets the errors of initial machine grading.
2. Running the grading process five times and taking the most frequent outcome. Next, we show that the variation in
outcomes across five machine grading attempts as measured by the Normalized Shannon Information Entropy can
serve as a grading confidence index. By setting the threshold entropy to 0.4, a human instructor can identify ~40% of
all potentially incorrect gradings by reviewing just 10 - 15% of all responses with entropy higher than the threshold.
Finally, we show that it is straightforward to use GPT-4o to write clear and detailed explanations of the partial credit
grading outcomes. Those explanations can be used as feedback for students, which will allow students to understand
their grades and raise different opinions when necessary. Almost all feedback messages generated were rated 3 or
above on a 5-point scale by two instructors who had taught the course multiple times. The entire grading and feedback
generating process cost roughly $5 per 100 student answers, which shows immense promise for automating laborintensive grading process by a combination of machine grading with human input and supervision.
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid recent advancement in both capability
and availability of Generative Artificial Intelligence
(GenAI), in particularly large language models (LLM)
such as GPT-4, has spurred a growing body of research
exploring their applications across many different
areas of education [1,2]. One of those areas that has
gained a substantial amount of recent interest is
Automated Short Answer Grading (ASAG) [3,4] and
Automated Long Answer Grading (ALAG) [5]. Both
ASAG and ALAG utilize LLM’s ability to process and
generate natural language to grade large numbers of
student written responses, especially for problems in
STEM domains including physics. Using GenAI to
assist the assigning of students written response has
the clear benefit of relieving instructors from time
consuming and largely repetitive work of
grading [6,7], and could potentially provide students
with more detailed and timely feedback on their
understanding, which is highly beneficial for
learning [8].
Most ASAG or ALAG studies published prior to
2023 used smaller language models that need to first
be trained on a corpus of domain specific data (for
example see [3,9]) to achieve satisfactory performance.
Since 2023, many studies have shifted towards using
general purpose language models, also called
foundational models [10], with the most popular
foundation models being GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 [11].
The most significant advantage of using foundational
LLMs is that they require no pre-training on existing
data, which greatly simplifies the grading process. In
most cases, grading one student response simply
involves sending a piece of natural language text,

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

called a prompt, to the LLM. A prompt usually
consists of a problem body, a grading rubric and
grading requirements, and a student response.
Sometimes one example response-grading pair or
more could also be included in the prompt.
It is important to clarify that the term GenAI refers
to a family of artificial intelligence models that
generates contents ranging from text, computer code,
images and videos [12]. LLMs are a type of GenAI
specialized in processing and generating text
(including computer code). Most recent AI grading
studies either solely rely on LLMs, or use a multimodal model such as GPT-4 or GPT-4V that could
process both text and images [13]. Since the current
study only involves processing and generating text, in
the rest of the paper we will use the term LLM instead
of the term GenAI.
A. Prior studies on LLM grading
A number of recent studies have tested
foundational LLMs’ grading capabilities across a
range of different STEM topics, response types,
grading outcomes and grading strategies. For example,
Kortemeyer [7] used GPT-4 to grade short answers to
science questions by two-way (True/False) or three
way (Correct/Partly correct/Incorrect) outcomes, and
studied whether providing a reference answer in the
grading prompt is beneficial. Lee et al. [14] used
GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 to grade students’ short answers
to science questions, and compared the effectiveness
of six different prompting strategies using prompt
templates with replaceable components. Henkel et
al. [15] used GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 to grade short
answers to K-12 science questions by correct or
incorrect, and compared to the consensus of two
human raters. Carpenter et al. used GPT-4 [16] to
grade short, single step answers to 13 university level

computer science questions, categorizing the answers
into Correct, partially correct and incorrect.
For grading longer student answers to more
complicated multi-step problems, Sonkar et al. [5]
compared the performance of multiple language
models on grading longer responses for university
level Chemistry questions. Golchin et al. [17] used
GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 to grade responses in several
Massive Open Online Courses, with topics ranging
from History to Astronomy, and compared LLM
grading to both instructor and student peer grading.
Liu et al. [13] used GPT-4V to grade students’ written
mathematical derivation in a university level math test
according to a multi-item rubric.
For university level physics, Yan, Zhang and Jia
graded four university level conceptual physics
questions using GPT-4, using rubric items scored on a
scale of 0-3, and examined LLM grading accuracy
with or without reference answers [18]. Kortmeyer
and colleagues [19,20] usedGPT-4 or GPT-4V to
grade students’ hand-written responses in upper level
or advanced intro level thermodynamics problems,
and investigated a number of issues such as comparing
different grading workflows, generating confidence
indicators for grading outcome, to iteratively
improving rubric item writing. Our own earlier
study [21] compared the effectiveness of three
different prompt styles on grading of one physics
conceptual question.
B. Common strategies to improve
LLM performance
Most of those studies claim that LLMs, especially
GPT-4, can reach human-level grading accuracy. To
achieve this level of grading accuracy, three strategies
are commonly used to improve LLM performance.
Chain-of-thought (COT) prompting: COT
prompting [22] instructs the LLM to first generate the
reasoning steps, then generate the final answer. A
simple form of COT prompting could be achieved by
simply appending “Let’s think step-by-step” to the
prompt [14]. COT prompting has been shown to
significantly improve the performance of LLMs in
reasoning tasks, as the reasoning steps generated
improve the chances that the LLM would predict the
correct end result. For LLM assisted grading, it is also
common to explicitly instruct the LLM to first
compare students’ response to the grading rubric,
using language such as “Please compare the student
response with grading rubric” [23] or “The
student says X. The rubric states Y. Based on
the rubric, the student earned a score of
Z.” [24]

Few-shot and zero-shot learning: Few-shot
learning means that the LLM learns how to perform a
task from a small number of examples, usually
provided as part of the prompt [25]. In the context of
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

LLM assisted problem grading, few-shot learning
means that a relatively small number (between about
1 – 20) of student response and corresponding
gradings were provided to the LLM (for example,
see [14,15,26]). In some studies, the examples were
carefully selected to represent typical student
answers [24]. Some studies have found that few-shot
learning yields better performance compared to
providing no examples (zero-shot learning) [14,16].
In contrast, zero-shot prompting tasks the LLM to
perform a given task without any examples. Studies
involving either longer answers, or problems across
different domains are more likely to adopt this strategy,
which may be due to the difficulty of creating large
numbers of quality examples [5,13,17].
Self-consistency: A less often used technique is
self-consistency [27], which is sometimes also
referred to as ensamble-voting [14]. The selfconsistency strategy simply tasks the LLM to perform
the same task multiple times, (usually between 3-10
times), and take the most common result (most selfconsistent) as the outcome. The self-consistency
strategy increases performance by utilizing the
inherent randomness of LLMs, and mitigates the
negative impact of occasional hallucination or
erroneous reasoning by a voting mechanism. Lee et al.
compared ensamble-voting strategy outcome to
individual grading outcomes, but found that for GPT3.5 and GPT-4 models, the technique did not
significantly improve the grading accuracy [14].
Kortemyer et al. employed a similar strategy for
continuous point outcome, by taking the mean grade
from 10 runs [19].
C. Underexplored Areas in LLM
grading
Although the above mentioned studies have
explored multiple different grading strategies, there
are still several areas of LLM grading that have not
been fully explored.
First, content-wise most studies used LLMs to
grade either short, verbal response to one or two step
simple conceptual problems, or math derivations for
multi-step
numerical
calculation
problems [7,13,19,28]. Few studies have asked
students to verbally explain their reasoning process for
multi-step calculation problems, and use LLMs for
partial credit grading. For introductory level physics,
the instructional focus is more on teaching students to
"know which equation to apply", rather than
manipulating the equations to reach the final answer.
Therefore, assessing students' reasoning during
problem solving is highly valuable. Second, there were
not many studies that systematically explored the
potential of prompt-engineering [29] for improving
the performance on LLM graders. Most existing
studies used one or two prompts, and compared

strategies such as whether a grading rubric should be
given [5,17], rather than comparing different methods
of writing a prompt.
Most prompts used for LLM grading contain both
grading instructions and grading rubric, both of which
could be optimized to improve performance. For
grading instructions, while COT prompting technique
is a popular choice, the actual format of COT
prompting in different studies is quite different. Our
own earlier study with a small set of data suggests that
details of COT prompt writing may have significant
impact on the grading outcomes [21]. Regarding
grading rubrics, one recent study [20]examined
iteratively refined rubric item writing using Item
Response Theory, but did not find significant
improvements in outcome. Our own preliminary study
showed that adding detailed explanation to rubric
items could improve grading performance for GPT-3.5
model [21].
In addition, self-consistency as a potential strategy
for improving LLM grading outcome has not been
employed and tested in many studies.
Beyond improving the accuracy of LLM grading,
establishing an effective and equitable LLM grading
procedure also requires careful consideration of how
machine interface and integrate with humans,
including enhancing human oversight of grading
outcome and improving grading outcome transparency
for students.
For enhancing human oversight, one study
explored generating a confidence metric that could
identify potentially incorrect grading cases. Liu et
al. [13] used the standard deviation of continuous
grades from multiple grading runs as a confidence
indicator, and found that indicator has an average
accuracy of 0.69 in identifying wrong grading.
Whether a similar strategy could be applied to
categorical or binary outcome grading cases have not
been studied.
For increasing grading transparency for students,
we argue that LLM grading assistances could be easily
modified to generate effective student facing feedback.
As pointed out in Lee et al. [14], output of COT
grading prompt contains the rationale of LLM’s
grading decision, which makes the grading more
understandable for human experts. This presents an
opportunity to generate student facing feedback by
modifying the COT grading output using LLMs.
D. Research Questions and Design
of Current Study
In order to further explore the areas mentioned
above , the current study will seek to answer the
following three research questions.
RQ1: Can LLMs approach human-level accuracy
on grading students’ reasoning of multi-step
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

calculation problems, using a combination of promptengineering and self-consistency techniques?
RQ2: Can a grading confidence index be
developed for binary outcome rubric, using the level
of variation between multiple grading runs? How
effective is the confidence index?
RQ3: Can LLMs be tasked to generate adequate
quality student facing feedback based on the output of
COT grading prompt?
To answer those questions, the current study
collected data from three problems that were
administered on two exams in two sections of a
university introductory level physics course on
Newtonian Mechanics. For each problem, students
were asked to explain their problem-solving process in
words (including math expressions), in addition to
choosing or entering the correct final answer/number.
The three problems consist of one conceptual problem
and one numerical problem on the topic of
conservation of mechanical energy, and a second
numerical problem on conservation of linear
momentum. Students’ written responses were initially
graded based on a multi-item rubric by one humangrader, and awarded partial credits for partially correct
explanations. A second grader then graded all
responses independently for research purposes.
We then conducted the following LLM grading
experiments using both GPT-3.5 and GPT4o models:
1. We compared the grading performance of
different versions of grading prompts, using
prompt templates with replaceable prompt
components similar to what was used in Lee
et al. [14].
2. We compared the grading accuracies
between a single grading run and the mode
score from five independent runs using the
self-consistency strategy.
3. We tested using the levels of variation
between different self-consistency grading
runs as a confidence metric for identifying
potentially problematic grading cases.
4. We tasked LLM to generate student facing
grading feedback, based on the outcome of
COT grading, and asked two experienced
instructors to evaluate the quality of the
feedback.
We made the following four deliberate choices in
designing our grading approach, which sets apart the
current study from existing studies.
1. Each rubric item in a multi-item rubric is
graded as binary outcome (1/0).
While binary outcomes are mostly used for singlestep short answers in previous studies, we chose to
grade each rubric item on a binary scale for multi-step
problems because of three reasons. First, using a
multi-item rubric on a binary scale instead of a single-

item rubric on a multi-point scale can , in principle,
lead to a more accurate test of the level of agreement
between two grading outcomes as it examines each
item separately. For example, for a three-item binary
rubric, {1,0,1} and {1,1,0} are different by 2 digits, yet
both has the same total score of 2. The two grading
outcomes would have been considered as in agreement
if graded on a single-rubric on a scale of 0-3. It is
worth noting that Liu et al. [13] found that finegrained binary rubric results in lower human-machine
agreement compared to continuous holistic rubric,
which could indicate that agreement on binary output
rubric presents a greater challenge for LLMs than
continuous scale outcome. Second, binary outcome
makes it easier to find a mode grading outcome from
a relatively small number of self-consistency runs.
Compared to categorical outcome such as 0, 0.5, 1
(incorrect, partially correct, correct) for each rubric
item, binary outcome for each item reduces the
possible number of different grading outcomes,
allowing a consensus to be found with relatively fewer
numbers of runs.
Finally, we believe that any continuous or
categorical grading can in principle be reduced to
multiple-item binary outcome, if the scores are
consistent and fair across the entire student population.
For example, consider a rubric item that is graded on
an integer scale of 0-2. If the grading is fair for all
students, then we can always compare the answers
from all students who scored 1 to those who scored 2
(or to those who scored 1), and identify at least one
common difference between those answers to justify
grading. By doing so we have essentially created one
new binary outcome rubric items that differentiates
score 1 from score 2. Following this process one can
reduce any continuous outcome rubric item into
multiple binary rubric item. Therefore, multi-item
binary rubric grading can be seen a more fundamental
grading challenge.
2.
Grading rubric focuses on the
reasoning behind problem-solving process,
instead of the calculational fluency.
First, since introductory level physics courses
focus more on conceptual understanding than
calculational fluency, grading rubrics for introductory
level physics problems often assign the majority of
partial credits to selecting and properly applying the
physics principles to a problem, and less on correctly
calculating the results. Therefore, grading the
reasoning process alone could capture the majority of
partial credits in most introductory physics problems.
Second, since many introductory level students have
limited experience with LaTeX, their math input is
often non-standard and challenging to understand even
for human graders. Furthermore, students have the
freedom to define their own conventions in problem
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

solving, such as deciding the positive direction of the
y-axis to be either up or down. Third, evaluating math
expression is more challenging due to at least two
reasons. First, LLMs as stochastic systems are not
always reliable for rule-based tasks such as
mathematical manipulation or logical inferences [30].
Rather, accuracy of math expression can be much
more efficiently evaluated using tools such as python
or Mathematica.
3.
Ground truth of grading is
established using the grading of two
independent human graders, who are not
tasked with reaching a grading consensus.
Most previous studies took as ground truth the
grading of either a single human grader [13,18], or the
consensus reached by two/three graders [15,24]. In
this study, we chose to use two sets of grading from
two human graders for several reasons. First, using a
single human grader’s rating as ground truth can be
problematic as human graders themselves are far from
perfect [31]. Second, the level to which two human
graders agree with each other serves as a key baseline
for “human-level” grading consistency. In other words,
the LLM grader can be seen as “good enough” when
the level of agreement between LLM and human is
comparable to the level of agreement between two
human graders. Using a consensus of multiple graders
does not present the baseline measure of grading
consistency among humans. Finally, there are cases
where the student responses are inherently ambiguous,
and can be interpreted more than one viable way. As a
result, in this study we use cases in which LLM
grading differs from both human graders as an
indicator for potentially incorrect grading, which is
useful for evaluating the effectiveness of the
confidence index and answering RQ2.
4.
No standard reference answer or
example grading is provided.
At least two previous grading studies have shown
that providing standard reference answers could harm
LLM’s grading performance, especially for more
complicated multi-step problems [7,18]. It was
suggested that reference answers could limit LLM’s
ability to accept different forms of expressing the same
correct idea. For a similar reason, we chose a zero-shot
approach over a few-shot approach. In addition,
providing grading examples has two significant
practical limitations. First, it can be time consuming
for human graders to select typical responses and write
grading justification, especially for longer answers
with COT prompting, in which the example must also
contain step-by-step thinking process. Second, the
examples will significantly increase the length of the
prompt, and as a result significantly increase the cost
of the total grading process. Finally, a zero-shot
approach would make it more straightforward to

isolate the performance improvement from promptengineering which enables us to answer RQ1.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows.
The detailed study setup, problems, problem
administration and human grading process is
described in Section II A. Details of LLM grading,
including different prompt design and implementation
self-consistency strategy, as well as feedback
generation process are described in section Section II
B. Section II C. explains the details of data analysis
process and evaluation metric for answering the three
research questions. We present the results of the three
grading studies in Section IV, and discuss the
implications of the results in Section V and VI.

* Work done by gravity/gravitational force
is equal to the change in kinetic energy of
the girl

Question 2 was a numerical input question which
required students to input a numerical answer, on the
topic of conservation of mechanical energy that
involves two types of potential energy. This problem
has two very versions, one with the ball launching
from the spring tube (Figure 2), the other with the ball
being dropped from a height h onto the spring tube.
Students were presented with one of the two versions
at random. Since the solution process of the two
versions are nearly identical, we use a single rubric for
grading the solutions of both versions.

II. METHODS
A. Study Design and Materials
1. Problems and Grading Rubrics
The three problems used in the current study are
labeled Question 1, 2 and 3 respectively.
Question 1 was a conceptual question on the topic
of conservation of mechanical energy, as shown in
Figure 1.

Figure 2: Problem text and figure of Question 2
Human graders assigned partial credit to student
answers according to the following 3-item grading
rubric:

Figure 1: Problem text and figure of Question 1
Human graders used the following 3-item rubric
when grading students’ responses to Question 1:

Item 1: The student should mention either one
of the following:
* conservation of energy OR
* work and kinetic energy theorem
Item 2: The student mentioned either one of
the following:
* No net external non-conservative work is
being done, so mechanical energy is conserved
for the system OR
* the slide is frictionless/smooth OR
* gravity is the only force that does work
on the girl.
Item 3: The student indicated either one of
the following:
* potential energy is converted into
kinetic energy OR

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

Item 1: Wrote down conservation of mechanical
energy or indicated that mechanical energy can
be used to solve the problem
Item 2: The potential energy term of the
conservation of mechanical energy formula
contains both a gravitational potential energy
term and an elastic potential energy term.
Item 3: The gravitational potential energy
term contains an expression similar to (h + L
– L_0), and shouldn’t be just mgh or mgL

Note that although it is possible to use work and
kinetic energy theorem to solve this problem, no
student chose that strategy due to the difficulty of
calculating work done by the spring which requires
integration. Therefore, the rubric was not designed to
account for that.
Question 3 was also a numerical input problem on
the topic of conservation of linear momentum during
a 2-dimensional collision (Figure 3). This problem
was chosen because linear momentum is a vector
concept, therefore the solution involves vector
decomposition using trigonometry, which was not
present in the previous two problems.

Figure 3: Problem and figure of Question 3
Human graders assigned partial credit to student
answers according to the following 3-item grading
rubrics:
Item 1: Decomposed linear momentum of boulder
2 into its x and y components.
Item 2: Wrote down conservation of linear
momentum equation for both the x and y
directions independently.
Item 3: Used Pythagorean theorem to find the
magnitude of the final velocity.

For this problem, 10 students took an alternative
correct solution path, which involves directly
calculating the total linear momentum of the two
boulders using the law of cosines, and dividing the
result with the mass of both boulders. Since handling
multiple solution paths is more complicated and out of
the scope of the current study, we removed those
student responses from the research data set.
2. Problem administration:
Question 1 was administered as part of a mid-term
exam in one of the sections of an introductory
mechanics course, and Questions 2 and 3 were
administered as part of the final exam in another
section of the same course. The enrollments for both
sections were 99. Both exams were closed-book
exams administered as a Quiz on Canvas learning
management system [32]. Students took both the
midterm exam and final exam in class with proctors
present. Students were not made aware of the grading
rubric during or before the exam.
For each question, students need to first either pick
a choice item (Question 1) or enter a correct number
(Questions 2 and 3), then provide a detailed
explanation of the problem-solving process, including
explaining the physics principle being applied. The
explanation can be typed in a text input box on Canvas,
which has a limited capacity for accepting
mathematical symbols.
Students were instructed to explain their step-wise
problem-solving process, including the physics
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

principles involved, justification of the principles used,
known and unknown variables, and other key steps.
The detailed student facing instructions for
explanation can be found in Appendix D.
3. Human grading of responses
For all three problems, one human grader initially
graded only the responses from students who
submitted an incorrect answer, and assigned partial
credits to those students if their answer satisfied one or
more rubric item. Each rubric was initially assigned a
binary grade, and then multiplied by a factor
determined by the instructor of the course based on the
assigned point value of the problem. The amount of
total partial credit available added up to about 70%-80%
of the assigned point value of the problem.
For research purpose, the first human graders
graded the remaining responses for students who
submitted the correct answer. A second human grader
also graded all the responses independent from the
first human grader. For Question 3, a third human
grader also graded all the responses, due to
exceptionally low levels of agreement between the
first two graders. The process is explained in more
detail in the Results section.
B. LLM grading and Feedback Generation
1. Large Language Models
LLM grading was conducted using two chat
models deployed on the Azure OpenAI platform: gpt35-turbo version 0301, and gpt-4o version 2024-05-13.
The model is instructed to operate at temperature of
0.8, which is similar to several other LLM grading
studies [5,13,14]. The maximum output token is set to
1000. Gpt-4o was also used for feedback generation.
We chose gpt-4o over gpt-4 since gpt-4o offers similar
performance at 1/10 of the cost.
2. LLM grading of student responses
Communication with LLMs was through the Azure
Python API in the Langchain_openai package version
0.1.8 [33]. Grading of each response is a separate API
call to the LLM, ensuring that the LLM do not have
memory of previous gradings or other student
responses. The grading output is stored and organized
into python dataframes using the pandas package
version 2.2.1 [34].
2.1 Prompt Template
The prompt provided to the LLM contains two
messages. A system message that tells the model what
roles to play and how to behave in general [35], and a
human message that contains the student response and
grading instructions. For this study the same system
message is used for all grading tasks, while the human
message changes on every grading case.
The system message used in this study is:
You are a college introductory physics teacher
who is grading a student's written explanation
to a physics problem based on a grading

rubric. Your grading always ends with a comma
separated binary vector.

The human message (or the prompt) is constructed
according to the following prompt template:

Here is a college introductory level physics
problem:
"{ProblemBody}"
Students are instructed to provide an
explanation to their answer.
Student explanations are being graded based on
the following rubric:
"{Rubric}"
Grading is performed strictly according to the
following requirements:
# The grading must start with the evaluation
of each individual rubric item.
{Requirements}
# For each rubric item, the student
explanation will receive 1 point if the
explanation satisfies the rubric, or 0 point
if the explanation does not satisfy the
rubric. Never assign a 0.5 for an item.
# Each rubric item is graded only once.
# Steps or sentences in student's explanation
may not follow the same order as the rubric.
# Conclude the grading response with vector of
length 3, included in curly brackets and
separated by commas, such as {{0,0,0}} or
{{1,0,1}} or {{1,1,1}}. The vector summarizes
the grading of each of the three rubric items.
Student response:
"{StudentResponse}"
Grading:

The template contains four replaceable
components, enclosed in curly brackets, that can be
changed programmatically between different grading
tasks. The ProblemBody component contains the body
of the problem, and is changed for each problem being
graded. The Rubric component contains the rubric
used for machine grading. The “Requirements”
component contains different instructions on how the
language model should respond to the grading task.
Those two components are the target of promptengineering efforts. Finally, the StudentResponse
component contains the actual student response to the
problem to be graded.
2.2 Rubric Design:
We tested two different styles of rubric writing.
“Simple rubric” is essentially the same as rubric given
to the human graders, with added texts “Students could”
in front of each rubric item.
“Detailed rubric” expands the simple rubric by
providing the LLM with additional explanations,
instructing the LLM on types of expression that could
be seen as satisfying the rubric item. For example, the
Detailed rubric used for Question 2 Item 1 is as follows:
# Item 1: The student wrote down conservation
of mechanical energy equation or indicated

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

that mechanical energy can be used to solve
the problem
* The student could write mathematical
expressions such as MEi = MEf, ME_i - ME_f =
0, or KE_i + PE_i = KE_f + PE_f, or other
similar forms
* Students could use terms such as
"Energy", or "Mechanical Energy".

All other rubric items used in this study can be
found in Appendix A.
For Question 2 and 3, based on the initial grading
outcome, different versions of Detail rubric were
tested.
2.3 Grading Requirements:
We tested the following three types of
requirements for the grading process:
Basic Chain of Thought (COT): The COT
requirement largely mimics the most common COT
strategies being used in different studies, which read
as follows:
For each rubric item, first write step by
step reasoning on why or why not the student
explanation satisfies or contradicts the item.
Then assign a binary grade of either 0 or 1,
with 1 indicating the student explanation
satisfied the rubric item, and 0 otherwise.

One deliberate design choice is to ask the LLM to
first write the reasoning and then assign a grade, which
is different from many other practices. This design is
based on the fact that LLM predicts following tokens
based on all previous tokens, including the tokens that
were previously generated. Therefore, if the reasoning
is presented before the grading, the grade generated
will be influenced by the reasoning test.
Explicit Compare: The explicit compare prompt
provides more explicit instruction on how the step-bystep reasoning should be constructed, by asking the
LLM to directly compare student explanation to the
item and item descriptions:

For each rubric item, first compare student
explanation with the rubric item and the item
description, then conclude if the explanation
satisfies or didn't satisfy the rubric item.
Finally, assign a binary grade of either 0 or
1, with 1 indicating the student explanation
satisfied the rubric item, and 0 otherwise.

Forced Compare: The forced compare prompt
explicitly requires the LLM to follow a rigorous
template of reasoning, and identify the most relevant
parts of student reasoning based its gradings on. In our
earlier study [21], this type of prompt resulted in
superior performance compared to conventional COT
prompt using GPT-35 and completion API.
# For each rubric item, write the grading
statement strictly following the order of the
statements below:
## First, state one of the following two:

"For item <<item number>>, the rubric
states that <<quote from the rubric item
description>>. The most relevant parts in the
student explanation are <<direct quote or
quotes from student explanation>>.
"For item <<item number>>, the rubric
states that <<quote from the rubric item
description>>. No part in the students'
explanation is relevant to the rubric"
## then state one of the following:
"the student explanation is similar to
this part of the rubric description <<most
similar part of the rubric>>",
"the student explanation and the rubric
description are very different"
"the student explanation and the rubric
description are irrelevant"
## Finally, conclude with a binary score:
"so the grade is 1"
"so the grade is 0"

2.4 Prompt Styles:
In this study we refer to the different combinations
of rubric design and grading requirements as different
prompt styles. Since in this study we emphasize
finding the best performing prompt style, rather than
an extensive exploration of understanding what makes
a prompt effective, we did not completely test all
possible combinations of rubric design and grading
requirements, but instead selected the following four
most representative combinations listed in Table 1:
Table 1: Correspondence between prompt styles,
rubric styles, and grading requirements.
Prompt Style
Simple COT
Detailed COT
Detailed Compare
Forced Compare

Rubric
Simple
Detailed
Detailed
Detailed

Requirement
Basic COT
Basic COT
Explicit Compare
Forced Compare

2.5 LLM Grading and Error Detection:
The entire grading prompt including all its
components was sent to the LLM for output generation.
Upon receiving the output from the LLM, a python
script examines whether the output contains a binary
vector such as “{0, 1, 1}” (since all three questions
happens to be graded on a 3-item rubric). If not, the
exact same prompt was sent back to the LLM as a new
grading task. The process was repeated until the output
contained the intended vector outcome. In all the
grading task in this study, the number of re-generated
cases range from 3 – 10 per 100 responses graded.
2.6 Self-consistency grading
Each prompt style was first used once to grade all
the student responses for each problem. Then the best
performing prompt style, judged based on the
evaluation metrics explained in the next section, was
selected for self-consistency grading, which repeats
the grading process five times. We chose 5 runs to
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

allow sufficient detection of variation between
different runs, while keeping the total run time for the
gpt-4o model to under 2 hours. Self-consistency runs
achieve three purposes:
1. To examine the stability of LLM grading
between different runs.
2. To test if using the mode grading could
achieve better performance than individual
runs.
3. To test using the level of variation between
different runs as an indicator for grading
quality
The stability of individual runs is characterized by
the average, minimum and maximum values of the key
metrics for measuring the quality of grading outcome,
explained in detail in the next section. Data tables
containing those values can be found in Appendix B.
The level of variation between different selfconsistency runs on the same response is measured
using the Normalized Shannon Information Entropy
(or entropy for short) between different runs, defined
as [36]:
∑𝑛𝑛𝑖𝑖=1 𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖 log 2 (𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖 )
𝐻𝐻𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = −
log 2 (𝑛𝑛)
In the context of self-consistency grading of one
student response, 𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖 is the frequency with which each
grading outcome as a binary vector (such as {1,0,1})
appears, and 𝑛𝑛 is the total number of runs (𝑛𝑛 = 5 in
the current study). When each run gives a different
grading outcome, 𝐻𝐻𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = 1 , when all runs give
unanimous grading outcome, 𝐻𝐻𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅 = 0.
For a particular response, mode score is defined as
the most common grading outcome among all 5 runs,
if there is more than one grading outcome. In the rare
case of a draw, the first outcome to appear in the data
table was selected. As a result, the entire set of mode
scores for all the responses is in most cases different
from the grading outcomes of any of the 5 individual
runs.
2.7 Student Facing Feedback Generation and
Evaluation
Student facing grading feedback is generated by
sending the following information to the LLM: the
problem body, the students’ response, the rubric, the
grading output of the top performing LLM grading
prompt for each problem, and some instruction for
feedback format. The grading output includes both the
LLM generated reasoning text and the final grade. The
format instruction instructs LLMs to write feedback
that contain three parts:1. A summary of the grading
rubric. 2. Feedback to students regarding how their
solution satisfies the rubric items. 3. Ask students to
contact their teacher if they have any questions.
Note that for all three problems, the mode-score for
self-consistency grading always outperforms

individual grading runs. However, for the current
study, student facing feedback is generated based only
on the top performing individual grading run to reduce
complexity of the process. The full prompt for
feedback generation, including system message,
human message and changeable components, can be
found in Appendix C. Initial testing on a few student
responses showed that gpt-4o writes significantly
better feedback than gpt-35, so for the current study
we use gpt-4o to generate student facing feedback.
A subset of the feedback messages was evaluated
by two instructors. Both instructors hold PhD in
physics education research and have taught
introductory level Newtonian mechanics multiple
times. We randomly selected 20 student responses and
grading outputs for each question to generate feedback.
The 60 generated feedback messages, together with
the problem text and student responses, were given to
the instructors to be rated on a scale of 1-5, according
to the following explanation:
1: I need to completely re-write the feedback
before giving it to the student.
2: I need to re-write most of the feedback
before giving it to the student.
3: I only need to make some minor changes
before giving it to the student.
4: I am fine with giving it to the student
without making any changes.
5: I really like the feedback and think that the
student can benefit from it.
C. Data Analysis:
1. Metrics for grading quality.
In this study we graded student responses on a
multi-item rubric, and graded each rubric item on a
binary scale. Additionally, we chose the ground truth
to be two separate human graders’ performance.
Therefore, the metrics used for measuring the
agreement between two sets of grading outcomes are
also somewhat different from other studies that grades
on a continuous scale, and use either a single grader or
consensus between two graders as ground truth. We
use the following five metrics.
Percent of matching grades: The percentage of
cases in which the LLM agrees with a human grader
on all rubric items (i.e., the binary grade vectors must
be identical).
Average Simple Matching Distance (SMD):
SMD between two binary vectors is defined as [37]:
number of matching digits
total number of digits
number of mismatched digits
=
total number of digits
SMD measures the difference between two binary
grading outcome vectors. SMD = 0 when the two
SMD = 1 −

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

vectors are identical, and SMD = 1 when the two
vectors are different on all items. SMD is a better
choice for the binary grading task compared to the
more popular Jaccard Distance, because SMD
accounts for both matching grades of 0 and matching
grades of 1, whereas Jaccard Distance only accounts
for matching grades of 1. In binary grading, the
information carried by a 0 grade is equivalent to that
of the 1 grade.
In this paper, we measure the level of dissimilarity
between two sets of grading using the average SMD,
which is the SMD averaged over all cases (i.e.,
students) for each problem. Compared to the percent
of matching grades, average SMD (or SMD for short)
captures the contribution of partial matches.
Percent of cases different from both human
graders (Diff. Both): A third measure is the
percentage of cases in which the machine grading
outcome is different from the grading of both humans,
including cases when the two human grading
outcomes are the same or are also different. Cases
where the LLM did not agree with either human on
one or more rubric items indicate a more likely case of
erroneous grading by the LLM rather than by the
human. This metric turns out to be the most sensitive
measure for small performance improvement in cases
when the level of machine-human matching is already
high.
Macro F1 score: F1 score is a metric that is widely
used in machine learning to assess the performance of
a predictive model. For any binary classification, the
F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision and
recall [38]:
2 × Precision × Recall
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇
=
𝐹𝐹1 =
1
Precision + Recall
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 + (𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹 + 𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹)
2
Here, TP, FP, and FN stand for True Positive, False
Positive, and False Negative, respectively. For the
current multi-item rubric, F1 score is calculated for
each rubric item for the entire data set, and Macro F1
score is simply the unweighted average F1 score for
all rubric items. We use Macro F1 score instead of a
weighted average F1 score since the weight of each
rubric item can be treated as the same in all problems
tested. One Macro F1 score can be calculated between
machine grading and one human grader, and we use
the average Macro F1 score of the two as an indication
of machine grading performance.
Quadratic Weighted Kappa (QWK): QWK is a
metric widely reported in machine grading literature.
QWK measures the agreement between raters beyond
chance on ordinal data. The amount of partial credit a
student earns on a problem can be treated as ordinal
data by adding the binary score on all rubrics.
However, since QWK only accounts for the total score,
it is less accurate for binary grading of discrete rubric

items, since it cannot account for the differences
among cases such as {1,0,1}, {1,1,0} and {0,1,1}. We
report the average QWK (QWK average between the
two humans) just for making it easier to compare
current results with existing literature on AI grading.
2. Data visualization:
In addition to the data tables, for each problem we
visualize the three key metrics for grading quality in
three line and dots plot: SMD, Diff. Both, and Macro
F1. The SMD is plotted according to the average SMD
between machine grading and two human raters.
On each plot, metric value of each individual
grading run plus the self-consistency mode score are
plotted as line connected dots, for gpt-35 and gpt-4o
models separately. In addition, one or two separate
dots are added to represent the average value of each
metric from the five self-consistency runs. The error
bars on those separate dots represent the maximum
and minimum values of the metric among all five selfconsistency runs.
3. Evaluating self-consistency entropy as
confidence interval
We chose cases in which the LLM grading
outcome vector differ from both human graders as
potentially erroneous grading, and measured how
often we could identify those cases by reviewing all
grading cases with the self-consistency entropy higher
than a threshold. In other words, we are treating
entropy as a diagnostic test for potentially problematic
grading cases.
There are many metrics that can be used to assess
the performance of a binary diagnostic test [39]. In the
current study we focus on three of those that are most
relevant to a test of grading quality, namely, sensitivity,
precision, and F1 score. The cases that are potentially
problematic are used as the ground truth for those three
metrics.
1. Sensitivity or True Positive Rate: is defined
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇
as 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇+𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹, which in this case is the fraction of
potentially problematic cases that can be
identified by reviewing all the high entropy
cases.
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇
, which can be
2. Precision is defined as
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇+𝐹𝐹𝐹𝐹
seen as the fraction of cases that are
potentially problematic among all high
entropy cases.
3. F1 score: The F1 score is defined in the
previous section. However, the current F1
score signifies the effectiveness of the
diagnostic test, and shouldn’t be confused
with the Macro F1 score of grading accuracy.
4. Technic Detail of Data Analysis
All data analysis was performed using R version
4.3.3, the tidyverse package version 2.0.0 [40], and the
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

rstatix package version 0.7.2 [41]. QWK scores were
calculated using Metrics package version 0.4.1 [42],
and F1 scores were calculated using MLmetrics
package version 1.1.3 [43].
III. RESULTS
A. Human Grader Baseline
In Table 2, we list the number of responses for each
question, as well as the four measurement metrics
between the two human graders on each question as a
baseline for comparison. Question 1 had the highest
level of agreement between the human graders, while
Question 3 had the lowest level of agreement. It is
worth noting that Question 3 was initially graded by a
grading assistant and an experienced instructor, with
only 62.3% level of agreement and average SMD of
0.17. A second experienced instructor graded the
solutions again, and reached 70.1% agreement with
the first experienced instructor. Therefore, the grading
of the grading assistant was not used in the following
analysis. This suggests that accurate grading is more
challenging for Question 3, which may be due to either
the lower quality of student responses or less welldefined rubric items.
Table 2: Level of agreement between two human
graders by measurement metrics.
Problem
N SMD match
F1 QWK
Question 1 96 0.087 74.0% 0.925 0.908
Question 2 83 0.108 72.3% 0.816 0.825
Question 3 77 0.130 70.1% 0.858 0.869

The percentage of student answers satisfying each
rubric item judged by each grader (graded as 1) is
listed in Table 3. It should be noted that “h1” and “h2”
are different human experts for each of the three
problems. As can be seen from the table, for Question
1, item 1 is easier to satisfy than items 2 and 3. For
Question 2, item 1 and 2 are quite easy to satisfy while
item 3 was much more difficult. For Question 3, all
three items were about the same. There were no
substantial differences in percent correct between the
two human graters for each problem.
Table 3: Percent correct of each human grader on each
rubric item by each problem.
problem
Question 1
Question 1
Question 2
Question 2
Question 3
Question 3

grader
h1
h2
h1
h2
h1
h2

item 1
56.2%
55.2%
81.9%
84.3%
49.4%
59.7%

item 2
28.1%
30.2%
77.1%
73.5%
50.6%
54.5%

item 3
38.5%
36.5%
26.5%
24.1%
50.6%
59.7%

B. Cost and time of Grading tasks

For each of the three problems, the cost of grading
all student responses once using LLM ranged between
$0.2 to $0.3 using GPT-3.5 model, and between $0.7
to $1.00 using GPT-4o model. The difference in cost
between different prompt styles is negligible. The time
for grading all responses for each problem is under 10
minutes for GPT-3.5 model, and between 20 to 25
minutes for GPT-4o model. The differences between
different prompt styles were also not significant, with
Simple COT being the fastest.
C.
LLM Grading Performance
Question 1: As shown in Table 4 and Figure 4,
GPT-4o model significantly outperformed GPT-3.5
model on every measure under all prompt versions.
Within GPT-4o model, both Detailed Compare and
Detailed COT outperformed Simple COT. Detailed
Compare reduced cases that differed from both human
graders by 1 case (1%) compared to Detailed COT,
and slightly improved the average Macro F1 score.
Forced Compare resulted in significantly worse
performance in all metrics. Based on those results, we
chose Detailed Compare prompt to conduct the
additional 5 self-consistency runs.

Self-consistency runs show that the slight
advantage of Detailed Compare over Detailed COT
prompting is within the range of possible fluctuations
between different runs, so the difference between the
two prompt styles is minimum. The mode score of all
five self-consistency runs outperformed the original
Detailed Compare grading run, and is slightly better
than the best performing run of the five individual selfconsistency runs (see Appendix B for data). Based on
all five metrics, the level of agreement between selfconsistency mode score and human graders were
almost identical to the level of agreement between
human graders.
It is worth noting that the grading using Detailed
Compare prompt seems to agree with human grader 1
more than human grader 2, whereas detailed COT
seems to evenly agree with both graders.
In summary, for question 1 we found that both
Detail Compare and Detailed COT outperformed other
two prompt strategies, and that Detailed Compare
outcome was stable across multiple runs. Selfconsistency mode grading outperforms individual
Detailed Compare grading and reaches human level
agreement with human graders.

Figure 4: Outcome of different measures of agreement/disagreement for Question 1: A) Average SMD B) Different
from both human graders. C) Average Macro F1 score. The unconnected dots on each graph represents the average
value from five self-consistency runs, and the error bars correspond to the best and worst single runs. Level of
agreement between two human graders are indicated using dotted lines for Average SMD and average Macro F1
score.
Table 4: Grading accuracy measures for LLM against a human grader for all prompt styles tested for Question 1. h1
and h2 indicate the two human graders. Macro F1 and QWK represent the average Macro F1 score and average QWK
score from the comparisons with the two human graders, respectively. Asterisk indicates the best performing prompt
on a single grading run.
Model Prompt_Style
gpt35 Simple COT
gpt35 Detailed COT
Detailed
gpt35
Compare
gpt35 Forced Compare
gpt4o Simple COT
gpt4o Detailed COT

SMD.h1 match.h1 SMD.h2 match.h2 diff.both
0.278 42.7%
0.302 37.5%
54.2%
0.212 56.2%
0.222 54.2%
39.6%

Macro F1
0.717
0.806

QWK
0.598
0.730

0.201 55.2%

0.219 52.1%

38.5%

0.820

0.736

0.219 50.0%
0.132 69.8%
0.097 74.0%

0.208 54.2%
0.128 65.6%
0.101 74.0%

40.6%
22.9%
15.6%

0.830
0.884
0.913

0.729
0.861
0.917

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

Model Prompt_Style
Detailed
gpt4o
Compare*
gpt4o Forced Compare
Self-consistent
gpt4o
Mode

SMD.h1 match.h1 SMD.h2 match.h2 diff.both

Macro F1

QWK

0.090 77.1%

0.108 72.9%

14.6%

0.915

0.922

0.153 65.6%

0.142 62.5%

28.1%

0.866

0.848

0.080 78.1%

0.097 71.9%

13.5%

0.924

0.905

Question 2: As shown in Figure 5 and Table 5, the
difference in performance between GPT-4o and GPT35 is even greater than in Question 1. Within GPT-4o
model, differences between different prompt styles
were smaller, with Detailed Compare outperforming
other two prompt styles on most metrics. Simple COT
prompting had a very high level of agreement with
grader h2, but a much poorer level of agreement with
grader h1. The Macro F1 score was also slightly higher
than the one with other prompt styles, likely due to
high levels of agreement with grader h1. Performances
by Detailed COT and Detailed Compare prompts were
much more balanced. Forced compare prompts
performed similarly to Detailed COT, but not as good
as Detailed Compare. Therefore, we chose Detailed
Compare prompt to conduct self-consistency runs.
Self-consistency runs show that the performance
differences between different prompt styles were
similar to the range of possible fluctuations between
different runs. The mode score once again outperforms
all the individual runs, and is closest to human level
agreement, and even had identical Macro F1 score as
between human graders.
However, self-consistency mode score still had
different grading with both human graders on 19.3%
of the cases, which is much higher than the best
performing prompt for Question 1. When examining
some of the cases where the LLM grader differs from
both humans, we identified two main patterns. First,
since the final elastic potential energy of the system
was zero, some students omitted the term in their
solution, stating for example “I solved for MEi
which is equal to kinetic energy plus potential
energy … next I solved for the final mechanical
energy which is the kinetic energy of the ball
(1/2mv^2) and the potential energy of the ball
at the height (m-gh)”. Yet, GPT was meticulously

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

checking for the presence of both kinetic and potential
energy in both initial and final states, giving grading
justifications such as “* However, the student does

not mention elastic potential energy or provide
expressions like 1/2k(L-L0)^2.”. Second, the

original rubric explanation may have over emphasized
that the gravitational potential energy should be
“mg(h+L0-L)”, and the AI grader seems to be
checking for the presence of both L0 and L in the math
expression. However, some students could have
verbally described the solution process as “However,
for h I added the change in L as the ball
traveled that distance in addition to the
height from which h is representing.”. Others

chose a different reference height for zero potential
energy, resulting in “mgh” and “mg(L0-L)” on different
sides of the conservation equation, which confuses the
AI grader.
Therefore, we modified the rubric explanation by
adding text explaining those two cases to the AI, which
we refer to as “Detailed compare 2” (see Appendix A).
As shown in Figure 5 and Table 5, those modifications
to the rubric explanation significantly improves the
performance of the LLM grader on every metric
(Detailed Compare 2), especially in dropping the
fraction of cases in which the AI differs from both
human graders from 21.7% to only 9.6%. The LLM
graders agrees with each human grader more than the
human graders agree with each other, which means
that in cases where the human graders disagree, the AI
will most likely side with one of the two graders. The
self-consistency runs with this new rubric (Selfconsistent 2) shows that the improvements are stable.
Once again, the mode score of the self-consistency
runs had slightly better performance than all the
individual runs.

Figure 5: Outcome of different measures of agreement/disagreement for Question 2: A) Average SMD B) Different
from both human graders. C) average Macro F1 score. The unconnected dots on each graph represents the average
value from five self-consistency runs, and the error bars correspond to the best and worst single runs. Level of
agreement between two human graders are indicated using dotted lines for Average SMD and average Macro F1
score.
Table 5: Grading accuracy measure for all prompt styles tested for Question 2. h1 and h2 indicate the two
humangraders. Macro F1 and QWK are the average Macro F1 score and QWK score from the comparisons with the
two humangraders.
Model
gpt35
gpt35
gpt35
gpt35
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o

Prompt_Style
SMD.h1 match.h1 SMD.h2 match.h2
Simple COT
0.237 39.8%
0.257 41.0%
Detailed COT
0.281 38.6%
0.285 39.8%
Detailed Compare
0.281 38.6%
0.285 39.8%
Forced Compare
0.277 41.0%
0.289 34.9%
Simple COT
0.145 59.0%
0.116 68.7%
Detailed COT
0.129 63.9%
0.141 63.9%
Detailed Compare*
0.124 68.7%
0.120 67.5%
Forced Compare
0.124 66.3%
0.137 63.9%
Self-consistency Mode
0.112 69.9%
0.124 69.9%
Detailed Compare 2*
0.080 80.7%
0.076 79.5%
Self-consistency Mode 2
0.064 81.9%
0.084 77.1%

Question 3: As shown in Table 6 and Figure 6,
GPT-4o still outperformed GPT-35 in all conditions
tested and across all metrics. However, within GPT4o, Simple COT had superior performance compared
to other prompt styles, which is opposite from what
was observed from the other two questions. The
simple COT grading result even surpassed human
level agreement on the average SMD and average
Macro F1. However, when self-consistency runs were
performed using simple COT prompt, we observed a
much bigger fluctuation in outcome quality compared
to the self-consistent runs for the two other questions.
The outcome of different runs ranged from far superior
than all other prompt styles, to comparable or even
worse than other prompt styles. The original Simple
COT happened to be one of the best of all six runs
simply by chance.
However, the mode score (Self-consistent Mode)
of the self-consistency runs with simple COT still
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

diff.both
53.0%
51.8%
51.8%
54.2%
25.3%
25.3%
21.7%
24.1%
19.3%
9.6%
8.4%

Macro F1
0.691
0.684
0.684
0.679
0.828
0.818
0.815
0.815
0.827
0.864
0.874

QWK
0.619
0.487
0.487
0.462
0.758
0.734
0.762
0.726
0.759
0.878
0.877

outperformed the other three prompt styles. The
average scores of the self-consistency runs on all
metrics were also better than the other three prompt
styles as shown in Figure 6.
To investigate why for this question, simple COT
seem to sometimes outperform all other prompt styles,
and whether it is possible to surpass the performance
of simple COT, we tried three more grading prompts:
Detailed Compare 2: Adding more explanations
to the existing detailed rubric, by studying cases where
Detailed Compare (initial run) differed from both
human graders.
Simple Compare: Using the simple rubric but
with the “explicit compare” grading requirement.
Detailed Compare 3: Remove the original rubric
explanations and replaced with explanations based on
examining cases where simple COT grading (initial
run) differed from both human graders.

Detailed Compare 2 was designed based on
similar strategy Detailed Compare 2 in Question 2.
Both Simple Compare and Detailed Compare 3
prompt tests the hypothesis that the original instructor
written rubric explanation actually reduced grading
performance by over emphasizing certain forms of
expression over other equivalent forms, causing the
LLM grader to lose flexibility in handling a variety of
student responses.
For Detailed Compare 2, one new explanation was
added to rubric item 2, stating that students could
“write down one conservation of linear momentum

equation, and either immediately or later
indicate that this equation is applied to both
x and y directions”. Two new explanations were
added to rubric item 3, the first one stating that “The
Pythagorean theorem must by applied to the
components of velocity or momentum.”, while the
second one states that “Simply stating "obtain the
magnitude" of the velocity do not satisfy this
rubric.”

For Detailed Compare 3, rubric item 1 contains one
explanation: “The student could also write m2v2x

and m2v2y in conservation of linear momentum
equations without explicitly decomposing the
momentum or the velocities.” Item 2 contain two

explanations, the first one stating that students can
state linear momentum conservation on x and y
directions separately, and don’t necessarily need to
write down the trigonometry, while the second one
states that “Only saying "momentum equation" or
"used momentum" does not satisfy this rubric.”.
Item 3 contain one explanation, stating that “Just
saying "put them together" does not satisfy
this rubric”.

As can be seen from Table 6 and Figure 6, all three
new prompts outperformed the original Detailed
Compare prompt by a substantial margin on all metrics.
When compared to the self-consistency mode score
(using Simple COT prompt), all three prompts had
similar average SMDs and lower fractions of cases
different from both human graders. However, the

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

Macro F1 scores are all lower than that of initial selfconsistent mode, probably due to the grading
outcomes are more similar to that of human grader h2
than human grader h1. Within the three prompts, the
performance of Detailed Compare 3 had the lowest
average SMD and lowest fractions of different from
both humans, but also slightly lower Macro F1 score.
Overall, the differences between the three prompt
styles, especially between Simple Compare and
Detailed Compare 3, are relatively small.
Based on those results, we conducted a second selfconsistency run, this time using the Detailed Compare
3 prompt due to its small performance advantage over
other prompts. For convention consistency, we named
this run “Self-consistent 3”, since it uses “Detailed
Compare 3” prompt style. The mode score of selfconsistent 3 outperformed almost all other grading
methods tested by wide margin on all metrics,
including self-consistency 1 (using simple COT). It
even outperformed the original simple COT run,
which was an exceptionally high performing run by
chance. Self-consistent 2 mode score also clearly
exceeded the human-to-human baseline in both
average SMD and Macro F1 score. Moreover, the
variance between the five runs in self-consistent 3 is
much smaller than that of self-consistent 1, indicating
that Detailed Compare 3 is a much more stable prompt
than Simple COT.
In summary, on Question 3 we made the following
observation: 1: The grading outcome of Simple COT
prompt can have much wider fluctuations between
different grading runs compared to Detailed Compare
prompting. 2: Too much rubric explanation could hurt
grading performance in certain cases, especially when
simple rubric is already working well. 3. Rubric
explanation that targets the errors in LLM grading
under simple rubric significantly improves the grading
outcome, whereas rubric explanation written by
human expert alone have minimum improvement for
performance.

A

B
40%

0.20

0.86

30%
Model

0.16
0.14

human graders

Model
0.84

Macro F1

0.18

Diff. Both

Avg. SMD

C

gpt35
20%
gpt4o

Model

gpt35

gpt35

gpt4o
0.82

gpt4o

10%
human graders

0.12

0.80
0%

Figure 6: Outcome of different measures of grading agreement for Question 3: A) Average SMD B) Different
from both human graders. C) Average Macro F1 score. The unconnected dots on each graph represents the average
value from five self-consistency runs, and the error bars correspond to the best and worst single runs. Level of
agreement between two human graders are indicated using dotted lines for average SMD and average Macro F1
Table 6: Grading accuracy measure for all prompt styles tested for Question 3. h1 and h2 indicate the two human
graders. Macro F1 and QWK are the average Macro F1 score and QWK score from the comparisons with two human
graders.
Model
gpt35
gpt35
gpt35
gpt35
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o
gpt4o

Prompt Style
Simple COT
Detailed COT
Detailed Compare
Forced Compare
Simple COT*
Detailed COT
Detailed Compare
Forced Compare
Self-consistency Mode
Detailed Compare 2
Simple Compare
Detailed Compare 3*
Self-consistency Mode 3

SMD.h1
0.212
0.221
0.177
0.195
0.143
0.156
0.165
0.177
0.160
0.152
0.156
0.165
0.143

match.h1
48.1%
48.1%
57.1%
53.2%
67.5%
61.0%
62.3%
54.5%
63.6%
61.0%
66.2%
61.0%
66.2%

D. Self-consistency entropy as an indicator of
grading quality.
The effectiveness of using the self-consistency
entropy as the grading quality indicator is listed in
Tables 7, 8 and 9, for the three questions respectively.
For Question 1, 27.1% of all responses had
entropy > 0, which included 69.2% of the cases where
LLM grading differed from both human graders
(sensitivity). If the entropy cutoff was raised to > 0.4,
then only 17.7% of the grading responses requires
review, which would identify 46.2% of all cases where
LLM grading differed from both humans. Given that
when using self-consistency mode score, only 13.5%
of all cases differed from both human graders, using
entropy > 0.4 as a confidence indicator would result in
only about 7% of all students receiving potentially
problematic partial credit grading without a human
review.
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

SMD.h2
0.186
0.203
0.177
0.203
0.100
0.173
0.147
0.134
0.108
0.126
0.113
0.095
0.091

match.h2
49.4%
49.4%
57.1%
54.5%
75.3%
54.5%
61.0%
64.9%
70.1%
66.2%
72.7%
77.9%
76.6%

diff.both
42.9%
42.9%
32.5%
37.7%
19.5%
32.5%
29.9%
31.2%
26.0%
27.3%
20.8%
18.2%
16.9%

Macro F1
0.791
0.798
0.824
0.795
0.872
0.836
0.836
0.806
0.859
0.849
0.847
0.845
0.863

QWK
0.806
0.750
0.790
0.768
0.877
0.845
0.831
0.847
0.867
0.854
0.854
0.871
0.877

Table 7: Effectiveness of using self-consistency
entropy to identify problematic grading cases for
Question 1.
entropy
>0
>0.4

review
27.1%
17.7%

sensitivity
69.2%
46.2%

precision
34.6%
35.3%

F1
0.462
0.400

For question 2, with entropy > 0.4, under selfconsistency 1 using the original detailed rubric, the
fraction of response that require review (16.9%) is
similar to that of Question 1, but the sensitivity is
about 10% lower. Under self-consistency 2, which
uses the improved detailed rubric, the fraction of cases
that require review drops to 10.8% when considering
cases with entropy > 0.4, while the sensitivity
increased to 43%. Given that only 8.4% of the cases
were potentially problematic, the method leaves only

about 5% of potentially questionable grading without
a human review.

instructor to review a significant fraction of responses,
which may not be worthwhile.

Table 8: Effectiveness of using self-consistency
entropy to identify problematic grading cases for
Question 2. SC1 and SC2 stand for self-consistency 1
and self-consistency 2, respectively.

E. Quality of Student Facing Feedback.
The instructor rating of AI generated student facing
feedback is summarized in Figure 7.
Instructor h2 rated all feedback messages 3 or
above (give to students with only minor modification),
whereas instructor h1 rated 87% of the feedback
messages 3 or above, and 8 feedback messages were
rated with a 1 or 2. Of the 8 feedback messages rated
with a 1 or 2, 5 was from Question 1 and 3 from
Question 3. Six out of those 8 feedback messages were
for response that received 0 or 1 out of 3 possible
points. Upon closer examination, in most of those 8
cases the feedback did not specifically address
students’ reasoning. For example, one student
response for Question 1 is:

Run
SC1
SC1
SC2
SC2

entropy
>0
>0.4
>0
>0.4

review
37.3%
16.9%
21.7%
10.8%

sensitivity
75.0%
31.2%
57.1%
42.9%

precision
38.7%
35.7%
22.2%
33.3%

F1
0.511
0.333
0.320
0.375

For Question 3, under self-consistency 1 which
uses simple COT as prompt, the fraction of response
that requires review is much higher compared to the
other two questions, which indicates that the grading
outcome of simple COT prompt has greater variation
between different runs. On the other hand, the
sensitivity, precision and F1 score of the test are also
higher than the other questions. For self-consistency 2
which uses detailed compare 3, the fraction of
responses with high entropy is about 10% lower,
similar to that of the other two questions. However, the
sensitivity, precision and F1 scores are also lower.
Since the LLM grading contains 16.9% of potentially
problematic grading cases, a sensitivity of 38.5%
would result in roughly 10% of students receiving
potentially problematic grading.
Table 9: Effectiveness of using self-consistency
entropy to identify problematic grading cases for
Question 3. SC1 and SC3 stands for self-consistency 1
and self-consistency 3.
Run entropy
SC1
SC1
SC3
SC3

>0
>0.4
>0
>0.4

require
review
41.6%
23.4%
31.2%
16.9%

sensitivity precision
85.0%
60.0%
69.2%
38.5%

53.1%
66.7%
37.5%
38.5%

F1
0.654
0.632
0.486
0.385

Overall, the common pattern across all three
questions is that when conducting 5 self-consistency
runs on Detailed Compare prompting, entropy is a
moderately effective indicator for potentially
problematic AI grading. When the minimum entropy
is set at 0.4, a human instructor will need to review
about 10% - 17% of all responses, and end up
detecting about 40% of potentially problematic
grading cases. In all three cases, a higher entropy
cutoff than 0.4 results in significantly worse sensitivity.
Given that the top performing AI grader will generate
only about 10% – 15% potentially problematic grading,
we think that detecting 40% of those cases is at least
acceptable in practice. Using entropy > 0 does improve
the sensitivity of detection, but also requires the
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

“Assuming the kids travel the same distance
and they weigh the same, their speeds would be
equal when they reach the end of the slides.
Their initial and final positions are the
same. The displacement is the same. The height
is also the same. Therefore their speeds will
be equal.
K=(1/2)mv^2
p=mv”

This response was graded as 0 out of 3, and the AI
generated feedback, after explaining the grading
rubrics, only contains the generic statement of:

Unfortunately, I don't think your
explanation mentioned any of the aspects
listed above.

In contrast, below is an example from the same
question, graded as 0 out of 3, and rated 4 by both
instructors. This student wrote the following in the
explanation:
1. Centripetal Force, due to the curve
of the second slide.
2. As stated previously, the second
slide is curved while the first is a
straight course into the pool.
3. When taking the curved state of one
pool and the straight course of the
other, the building of kinetic energy
in the second pool is greater as the
curve allows for a more sudden drop
and higher velocity to the end of the
pool.

This time the AI generated feedback that both
directly addresses the students’ response, and also
briefly mentioned the correct solution method:

Unfortunately, I don't think your explanation
mentioned any of the aspects listed above. You
focused on centripetal force and the building
of kinetic energy due to the slide's
curvature, which are not relevant to solving

and potential energy is converted to kinetic
energy irrespective of the slide's shape.

this problem. The correct approach involves
understanding that mechanical energy is
conserved because the slide is frictionless,

All Problems

Question 1

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

1

2

3
h1

4
h2

5

0

1

2

3
h1

Question 2

4

5

h2

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1

2

3
h1

Question 3

4
h2

5

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

1

2

3
h1

4

5

h2

Figure 7: Distribution of instructor rating of the quality of LLM generated feedback messages. The two raters were
labeled as h1 and h2.
IV. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
A. Summary of Key observations
We first summarize the key observations from the
study below, and compare them to results from
existing studies.
1.
For RQ1, providing the right
amount and right type of rubric item explanation
brings the most improvement to LLM
performance, allowing GPT-4o model to agree
with human raters in 70% - 80% of all cases,
which is identical to or even higher than the level
at which human graders agree with each other.
Too few or too much explanation will both reduce
grading accuracy. Explanation targeting errors in
LLM grading leads to the most significant
performance improvement.
Explicit compare grading instruction may
have resulted in a small improvement in grading
accuracy compared to basic COT instruction.
Whether it also leads to smaller variation between
different runs needs to be further tested in future
studies. Forced compare instructions, on the other
hand, significantly reduces performance for GPT4o models, unlike what was observed for gpt-3
model in our own earlier study [21].
Adding rubric item explanation specifically
designed for LLM grading has not been studied in
previous LLM grading research. Compared to
few-shot learning, adding rubric explanation is
more cost-effective for improving grading
accuracy, as it results in significantly shorter
prompts. Furthermore, rubric explanation can be
written to cover multiple possible situations in a
few sentences, whereas each example in few-shot
prompting only covers one situation each example.
2.
The mode-score of 5 selfconsistency runs outperforms the best single
grading run in almost all cases. Combined with
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

observation 1, those results show that a
combination of prompt-engineering and selfconsistency technique allows GPT-4o to achieve
human level grading performance with zero-shot.
Note that the mode-score performance is only
significantly better than individual runs in
Question 3, but not Questions 1 and 2. This might
explain why Lee et al. [14] failed to observe
significant performance improvement using a
very similar strategy in their study, as their study
involves simpler and shorter answers.
3.
Utilizing rubric explanation and
self-consistency, GPT-4o can grade written
responses and generate good quality student
facing grading feedback, at the cost of about $5
per 100 student responses. With Macro F1 score
and QWK score both above 0.8, the grading
performance of our best performing prompt is on
par with most previous studies that claimed to
have reached human-level grading accuracy (for
example in [24]).
4.
For RQ2, the entropy of selfconsistency runs could serve as a moderately
effective indictor, that allows a human instructor
to identify 40% - 50% of potentially problematic
grading cases, by reviewing 10%- 20% of all
grading cases. The accuracy is lower than what
was reported in Liu et al. [13], which might be
partly due to the already high grading accuracy of
self-consistency grading in the three problems in
this study.
5.
For RQ3, we verified that the
student facing grading feedback can be
straightforwardly generated by LLM based on
COT grading outcomes. The vast majority of the
feedback messages were highly rated by
experienced instructors.

B. Advantages of LLM assisted grading over
conventional human grading.
The above results demonstrated four significant
advantages of LLM assisted grading over
conventional human grading.
First, LLM-assisted grading is significantly
cheaper and faster than human grading. This has been
shown by many previous studies of AI-assisted
grading. The current study further shows that even
under the more stringent condition of binary outcome
rubric items, GPT-4o can still perform at humangrader level accuracy for a fraction of the cost.
Second, LLM assisted grading has high levels of
grading consistency, when employing item
explanation and self-consistency, as seen in the small
variations in self-consistency runs. Consistency of
human graders on the other hand, are subjected to
many factors such as fatigue and experience. We also
observed in the case of Question 3 that specific human
graders can sometimes have a low level of agreement
with each other on the same rubric.
Third, LLM graders can continuously self-improve
and accumulate grading experience, through either
adding rubric item explanation, or via more
sophisticated techniques such as Retrieval Augmented
Generation (RAG) [44]. As shown in this study,
refinement to rubric explanation based on previous
grading outcome brings the most significant
performance improvement. On the other hand,
improving the accuracy of grading or understanding of
rubric of human graders takes much longer time, and
the experience usually does not carry over from one
grader to the next.
Last but not least, LLM assisted grading can
provide high levels of grading outcome transparency
in the form of student facing feedback. It would be
impossible for any human grader to write targeted
feedback for each student response in any reasonable
amount of time. Giving students transparent feedback
is particularly important since even the best
performing LLM grader with human oversight will
still contain about 5 – 10% of potentially erroneous
grading, and grading feedback provides students with
an opportunity to raise different opinions about the
received grade to the instructor. However, those
advantages by no means imply that LLMs will or
should completely replace humans in the grading
process. On the contrary, our results suggest that input
and oversight from one or more human experts is
indispensable in the process of LLM assisted grading,
and likely cannot be replaced even by future LLMs.
C.
The role of human-expert in LLM
assisted grading.
Using the current LLM assisted grading process,
human-expert input is indispensable for the following
three steps:
*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

1.
Designing the initial grading rubrics.
Items in the grading rubric indicate the aspects of
the problem-solving process for which student in
the current class should be evaluated against, and
needs to be determined by a human-expert based
on students’ level of subject understanding. For
example, whether students should be required to
state the justification for using conservation of
mechanical energy in a problem solution should
be the decision of a human expert depending on
students’ level of proficiency of the concept.
While part of the grading rubric authoring task
might be automated by AI in the future, the
decision-making process should always involve a
human-expert who has experience with the
student population.
2.
Writing rubric item explanation for
LLMs. Rubric explanation reflects the acceptable
ways that an idea or a reasoning step can be
expressed in the solution by a student. For
example, writing “1/2mv^2 = mgh” might be seen
as an indication that the student is implicitly
considering the idea of conservation of
mechanical energy, in the context of college
introductory level physics. We demonstrated that
this step is crucial in improving the agreement
between LLM grading and human grading.
One possible explanation for why rubric item
explanations are critical for LLM grading but not
for human graders is that human graders tries to
simulate the reasoning process of a student based
on students’ explanation during grading, whereas
LLMs focus more on judging the semantic
distance between the student response and rubric
items. In the above example, the math expression
“1/2mv^2 = mgh” could be semantically quite
distant from the words “conservation of
mechanical energy” on the surface level.
However, a human grader would deduct that the
student most likely had thought about energy
conservation before writing down the expression.
While it may be possible to first instruct an
LLM to generate simulated students’ reasoning
steps based on the written solution, then grade
based on the generated reasoning steps, the entire
process is likely significantly less efficient and
less accurate compared to adding rubric item
explanations.
Furthermore,
rubric
item
explanation also reflects the instructors’ choice
and requirement regarding acceptable types of
expression. Therefore, we argue that writing
rubric item explanation is a key step that
necessitates input from a human expert.
3.
Evaluating potentially problematic
grading cases. A human expert is required to
evaluate both the grading cases suggested by

LLMs according to confidence indices such as
entropy from self-consistency runs, and those
raised by students after students have reviewed
the grading feedback. The human expert could
then improve grading prompt to reduce erroneous
grading cases in the future.
The above three steps all involve judgements of
experienced human instructors, and are unlikely to be
replaced even my more capable models in the
foreseeable future.
D.
Limitations and future
directions.
Since the current study represents an initial
exploratory effort in many areas of LLM assisted
grading, it inevitably has some major limitations that
would require a more systematic study in the future.
First, the current study only investigated problems
with a single dominant solution. For problems that
have more than one frequently appearing possible
solution, a single grading prompt with multiple sets of
rubric items may not be the optimal approach for
grading. A more likely approach is to construct a
multi-agent system, in which the first GenAI agent is
tasked to identify which (if any) possible problemsolving method the student used, and sends both the
student response and the closest problem solving
method to the next GenAI agent to grade, according to
the rubric designed for the particular problem-solving
method.
Second, we deliberately chose not to evaluate the
accuracy of students’ mathematical fluency. How to
accurately evaluate both problem solving logic and
mathematical fluency in the same solution that
contains both verbal response and math expression is
a challenge that needs to be solved in future studies.
Nor did the current study explore grading problems
or student answers involving graphs or diagrams,
which require multi-modal models such as GPT4V [13,20]. Future studies should also examine the
reliability of the current method on different kinds of
problems across different domain areas.
Third, the quality of student facing feedback could
be further improved in future studies. The current
feedback only focuses on grade-transparency, which
explains why or why not students’ answer satisfies a
certain grading rubric. It is possible to provide specific
feedback to students’ common preconceptions, by
providing LLMs with knowledge from physics
education research (for example see [26]). That would
make the grading feedback more beneficial for student
learning.
[1]

References
L. Yan, S. Greiff, Z. Teuber, and D.
Gaševi´gaševi´c, Promises and challenges of

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

Fourth, the quality and structure of student
explanation likely can have significant impact on the
performance of both LLM and human graders. In the
current study, we provided detailed instructions to
students on how to explain their reasoning. Future
studies could investigate whether grading could be
further improved by teaching students to write more
clear and organized explanations of solution process.
On a related issue, future studies of AI-assisted
grading should pay attention to whether and how
students’ response changes, as AI grading becomes
more common and students are aware of the practice.
In particular, whether students will be more likely to
try to “trick” AI grader into giving partial credit by
writing certain key words or template phrases.
Last but certainly not least, more research is
needed to carefully examine the fairness of LLMassisted grading, and study whether inherent biases of
LLMs [31,45,46] impact grading outcomes for
students with different backgrounds, especially
different levels of English proficiency or language
habits. For example, do responses produced by
English as Second Language students receive lower
grades from AI grading compared to native English
speakers? How does the level of bias in LLM grading
compare with that in traditional human grading?
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we experimented with using LLMs to
grade students’ verbal explanations of their reasoning
process for complex, multi-step problems, according
to a multi-item, binary outcome rubric. The results
show that providing additional explanation to each
rubric item could allow LLMs to consistently perform
at or above typical human graders, especially when the
explanations specifically target the errors of LLM
grading. Furthermore, we showed that selfconsistency is a useful strategy for both improving
grading performance, and generating a confidence
index for LLM grading. Finally, LLMs can easily
generate student facing grading feedback to improve
grading transparency. Overall, the study demonstrated
that LLMs can be highly beneficial for grading large
amounts of student written responses for introductory
level physics problems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by NSF HER-1845436, and
by UCF Pegasus Innovation Lab Digital Course
Improvement program.

generative artificial intelligence for human
learning, (2024).

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

E. Kasneci et al., ChatGPT for good? On
opportunities and challenges of large language
models for education, Learn Individ Differ
103, 102274 (2023).
A. Ahmed, A. Joorabchi, and M. Hayes, On
Deep Learning Approaches to Automated
Assessment: Strategies for Short Answer
Grading, in Proceedings of the 14th
International Conference on Computer
Supported Education (SCITEPRESS Science and Technology Publications, 2022),
pp. 85–94.
A. Condor, Exploring Automatic Short
Answer Grading as a Tool to Assist in Human
Rating, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(Including Subseries Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics) 12164 LNAI, 74 (2020).
S. Sonkar, K. Ni, L. T. Lu, K. Kincaid, J. S.
Hutchinson, and R. G. Baraniuk, Automated
Long Answer Grading with RiceChem
Dataset, (2024).
J. S. Jauhiainen and A. G. Guerra, Evaluating
Students’ Open-ended Written Responses
with LLMs: Using the RAG Framework for
GPT-3.5, GPT-4, Claude-3, and Mistral-Large,
(2024).
G. Kortemeyer, Performance of the pretrained large language model GPT-4 on
automated short answer grading, Discover
Artificial Intelligence 4, (2024).
J. D. Bransford, A. L. Brown, and R. R.
Cocking, How People Learn: Brain, Mind,
Experience, and School: Expanded Edition
(National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.,
2000).
R. Gao, H. E. Merzdorf, S. Anwar, M. C.
Hipwell, and A. R. Srinivasa, Automatic
assessment of text-based responses in postsecondary education: A systematic review,
Computers
and
Education:
Artificial
Intelligence 6, 100206 (2024).
Competition and Markets Authority, AI
Foundation Models: Initial Report, 2023.
OpenAI et al., GPT-4 Technical Report,
(2023).
P. Cohan, What Is Generative AI?, in Brain
Rush (Apress, Berkeley, CA, 2024), pp. 9–28.
T. Liu, J. Chatain, L. Kobel-Keller, G.
Kortemeyer, T. Willwacher, and M. Sachan,
AI-assisted Automated Short Answer Grading
of Handwritten University Level Mathematics
Exams, (2024).
G. G. Lee, E. Latif, X. Wu, N. Liu, and X. Zhai,
Applying large language models and chain-ofthought for automatic scoring, Computers and

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

Education: Artificial Intelligence 6, 100213
(2024).
O. Henkel, L. Hills, A. Boxer, B. Roberts, and
Z. Levonian, Can Large Language Models
Make the Grade? An Empirical Study
Evaluating LLMs Ability To Mark Short
Answer Questions in K-12 Education, L@S
2024 - Proceedings of the 11th ACM
Conference on Learning @ Scale 300 (2024).
D. Carpenter, W. Min, S. Lee, G. Ozogul, X.
Zheng, and J. Lester, Assessing Student
Explanations with Large Language Models
Using Fine-Tuning and Few-Shot Learning.
S. Golchin, N. Garuda, C. Impey, and M.
Wenger, Large Language Models As MOOCs
Graders, ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:2402.03776
(2024).
Z. T. Yan, R. Zhang, and F. Jia, Exploring the
Potential of Large Language Models as a
Grading Tool for Conceptual Short-Answer
Questions in Introductory Physics, ACM
International Conference Proceeding Series
308 (2024).
G. Kortemeyer, J. Nöhl, and D. Onishchuk,
Grading assistance for a handwritten
thermodynamics exam using artificial
intelligence: An exploratory study, Phys Rev
Phys Educ Res 20, 020144 (2024).
G. Kortemeyer and J. Nöhl, Assessing
Confidence in AI-Assisted Grading of Physics
Exams
through
Psychometrics:
An
Exploratory Study, (2024).
Z. Chen and T. Wan, Achieving Human Level
Partial Credit Grading of Written Responses
to Physics Conceptual Question Using GPT3.5 with Only Prompt Engineering, in 2024
Physics Education Research Conference
Proceedings (American Association of
Physics Teachers, 2024), pp. 97–101.
J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma,
B. Ichter, F. Xia, E. H. Chi Quoc, V. Le, and
D. Zhou, Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits
Reasoning in Large Language Models, in
Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (Curran Associates Inc., New Orleans,
LA, USA, 2024), p. 14.
W. Xie, J. Niu, C. J. Xue, and N. Guan, Grade
Like a Human: Rethinking Automated
Assessment with Large Language Models,
(2024).
C. Cohn, N. Hutchins, T. Le, and G. Biswas,
A Chain-of-Thought Prompting Approach
with LLMs for Evaluating Students’
Formative Assessment Responses in Science,

[25]
[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]
[33]
[34]

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence 38, 23182 (2024).
T. B. Brown et al., Language models are fewshot learners, Adv Neural Inf Process Syst
2020-Decem, (2020).
T. Wan and Z. Chen, Exploring generative AI
assisted feedback writing for students’ written
responses to a physics conceptual question
with prompt engineering and few-shot
learning, Phys Rev Phys Educ Res 20, 010152
(2024).
X. Wang, J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. Le, E.
Chi, and D. Zhou, Self-Consistency Improves
Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language
Models, International Conference on Learning
Representations (2022).
G. Kortemeyer, Toward AI grading of student
problem solutions in introductory physics: A
feasibility study, Phys Rev Phys Educ Res 19,
020163 (2023).
A Developer’s Guide to Prompt Engineering
and
LLMs
The
GitHub
Blog,
https://github.blog/ai-and-ml/generativeai/prompt-engineering-guide-generative-aillms/.
I. Mirzadeh, K. Alizadeh, H. Shahrokhi, O.
Tuzel, S. Bengio, and M. Farajtabar, GSMSymbolic: Understanding the Limitations of
Mathematical Reasoning in Large Language
Models, (2024).
L. Kaldaras, H. O. Akaeze, and M. D. Reckase,
Developing valid assessments in the era of
generative artificial intelligence, Front Educ
(Lausanne) 9, 1399377 (2024).
Instructure
Inc.,
Canvas
Learning
Management System, www.canvaslms.com.
H. Chase, LangChain.
W. McKinney, Data Structures for Statistical
Computing in Python, in Proceedings of the

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

[35]
[36]
[37]

[38]

[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]

[45]
[46]

9th Python in Science Conference, Vol. 445
(2010), pp. 56–61.
Conceptual Guide | �� LangChain,
https://python.langchain.com/docs/concepts/#
messages.
A. R. Wilcox, INDICES OF QUALITATIVE
VARIATION., (1967).
R. R. SOKAL and C. D. MICHENER, A
STATISTICAL
METHOD
FOR
EVALUATING
SYSTEMATIC
RELATIONSHIPS.
P. Christen, D. J. Hand, and N. Kirielle, A
Review of the F-Measure: Its History,
Properties, Criticism, and Alternatives, ACM
Comput Surv 56, (2023).
D. M. W. Powers, Evaluation: from precision,
recall and F-measure to ROC, informedness,
markedness and correlation, (2020).
H. Wickham et al., Welcome to the Tidyverse,
J Open Source Softw 4, 1686 (2019).
A. Kassambara, Rstatix: Pipe-Friendly
Framework for Basic Statistical Tests.
B. Hamner and M. Frasco, Metrics:
Evaluation Metrics for Machine Learning.
Y. Yan, MLmetrics: Machine Learning
Evaluation Metrics.
P. Lewis et al., Retrieval-Augmented
Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP
Tasks, Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 33, 9459
(2020).
D. Rozado, The Political Biases of ChatGPT,
Social Sciences 2023, Vol. 12, Page 148 12,
148 (2023).
L. Lucy and D. Bamman, Gender and
Representation Bias in GPT-3 Generated
Stories, 48 (2021).

Question 1:
Simple rubric:

Appendix A: LLM Grading Rubrics

# Item 1: The student should mention either one of the following:
* conservation of energy OR
* work and kinetic energy theorem
# Item 2: The student mentioned either one of the following:
* No net external non-conservative work is being done, so mechanical energy is conserved for
the system OR
* the slide is frictionless/smooth OR
* gravity is the only force that does work on the girl.
# Item 3: The student indicated either one of the following:
* potential energy is converted into kinetic energy OR
* Work done by gravity/gravitational force is equal to the change in kinetic energy of the girl

Detailed Rubric:

# Item 1:
"* The student should mention either one of the following in the explanation:
** Conservation of energy/mechanical energy. Conservation of Energy can be expressed
in mathematical forms such as mgh = 1/2 mv^2, mghi+ �mvi^2=mghf+ �mvf^2, or MEi = MEf
** work and kinetic energy theorem.
** The student could explicitly mention both (gravitational) potential energy and
kinetic energy, or mention both work and kinetic energy, without explicilty saying conservation of
energy or name of the theorem.
* Only mentioning the term potential energy will NOT satisfy this rubric.
* The explanation cannot mention momentum, linear momentum, or centripetal forces"
# Item 2:
"* The student mentioned either one of the following in the explanation:
** No net external non-conservative work is being done, so mechanical energy is
conserved for the system.
** the slide is frictionless, or that the slide is smooth, so that mechanical energy
is conserved. Note that the explanation must have indicated using mechanical energy/enery/work
principles.
** gravity is the only force that does work on the girl.
** No non-conservative forces do work on the system."
# Item 3:
* The student explanation indicated either one of the following:
** potential energy or gravitational potential energy is converted or turned into
kinetic energy.
** Work done by gravity or gravitational force is equal to the change in kinetic
energy of the girl or the swimmer.
** Discussed relation between work done by gravity and kinetic energy or the
velocity of the girl/swimmer.
** Discussed the relation between potential energy or height, and the final kinetic
energy (or the girl's velocity), when the rest of the explanation resolves around energy concepts.
* The student can express potential energy as mgh or mgy, and kinetic energy as 1/2mv^2 or
0.5 mv^2. They can write expression such as mgh = 1/2mv^2"

Question 2:
Simple Rubric:

# Item 1: The student wrote down conservation of mechanical energy equation or indicated that
mechanical energy can be used to solve the problem
# Item 2: The potential energy term of the conservation of mechanical energy formula contains both
a gravitational potential energy term and an elastic potential energy term.
# Item 3: The gravitational potential energy term contains an expression similar to mg(h + L L_0), and shouldn't be just mgh or mgL

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

Detailed Rubric:

# Item 1: The student wrote down conservation of mechanical energy equation or indicated that
mechanical energy can be used to solve the problem
* The student could write mathematical expressions such as MEi = MEf, ME_i - ME_f = 0, or KE_i +
PE_i = KE_f + PE_f, or other similar forms
* Students could use terms such as "Energy", or "Mechanical Energy".
# Item 2: The potential energy term of the conservation of mechanical energy formula contains both
a gravitational potential energy term and an elastic potential energy term.
* The student must mention both gravitational potential energy and elastic potential energy in
the solution, mentioning only one of the two will not satisfy this rubric item.
* Elastic potential energy could be implied in mathematical expressions such as 1/2k(L-L0)^2, or
0.5*k*x^2, or 0.5*k(L0-L)^2.
* For this rubric item only, gravitational potential energy could be implied in mathematical
forms consisting of mg multiplied by a height or distance measure, such as mgh, mg(L-L0), or mg(hL-L0)
# Item 3: The gravitational potential energy term contains an expression similar to mg(h + L L_0), and shouldn't be just mgh or mgL
* The gravitational potential energy term could take forms such as mg(h + L0 - L) or m*g*(hl+l0), or other forms that involves modifications to the height h.
* The student could also write expressions such as mgh + mg(L-L0) or mgh + mg*(L_0 - L) or
similar forms
* Stating that gravitational potential energy is mgh, or including mgh alone will not satisfy
this rubric item.

Detailed Rubric 2:

# Item 1: The student wrote down conservation of mechanical energy equation or indicated that
mechanical energy can be used to solve the problem
* The student could write mathematical expressions such as MEi = MEf, ME_i - ME_f = 0, or KE_i +
PE_i = KE_f + PE_f, or other similar forms
* Students could use terms such as "Energy", or "Mechanical Energy".
* The student could also write the kinetic and potential energy terms, such as 0.5mv^2, 1/2kx^2,
mgh, mg(h-L), or similar terms, without explicitly mentioning mechanical energy.
# Item 2: The student solution included both a gravitational potential energy term and an elastic
potential energy term.
* The student must mention both gravitational potential energy and elastic potential energy in
the solution, mentioning only one of the two will not satisfy this rubric item.
* Elastic potential energy could be implied in mathematical expressions such as 1/2k(L-L0)^2, or
0.5*k*x^2, or 0.5*k(L0-L)^2.
* For this rubric item only, gravitational potential energy could be implied in mathematical
forms consisting of mg multiplied by a height or distance measure, such as mgh, mg(L-L0), mg(h-LL0), mg(h-L0)
* The final elastic potential energy is zero, so elastic potential energy can be omitted in the
final potential energy of the situation.
# Item 3: The student indicated that the calculation of the gravitational potential energy involves
a modification to the height h.
* The gravitational potential energy term could take forms such as mg(h + L0 - L) or m*g*(hl+l0), mg(h-L), mg(h+L0) or other forms that involves the term mg multiplied by a height that is
not just h.
* The student could also write expressions such as mgh + mg(L-L0) or mgh + mg*(L_0 - L), or
include both an mgh term and mg(l-l0) on different sides of the equation.
* The student could also indicate in words that the height in gravitational potential energy can
be calculated by adding the spring compression length to the height of the ball.
* Stating that gravitational potential energy is just mgh, or including mgh alone in the
equation will not satisfy this rubric item.

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

Question 3:
Simple Rubric:

# Item 1: The student solution decomposed the initial linear momentum of boulder 2 into its x and y
components.
# Item 2: The student wrote down conservation of linear momentum equation for both the x and y
directions independently.
# Item 3: The student used Pythagorean theorem to find the magnitude of the final velocity.

Detailed Rubric:

# Item 1: The student considered the x and y components of the linear momentum of the second
boulder separately.
* The student could write down the x and y components of linear momentum of the second boulder
in two separate conservation of linear momentum equations.
* The student could decompose the linear momentum of the second boulder using trigonometry, for
example m_2v2cos(theta), m2v2sin(theta), or mvcos(theta), mvsin(theta) for the second boulder.
* The student could explicitly state decomposing linear momentum of the second boulder into its
x and y components.
* The student may also decompose the velocity of the second boulder into its x and y components.
# Item 2: The student wrote down conservation of linear momentum equations for both the x and y
directions independently.
* The student must write down equations for both x and y directions.
* Conservation of linear momentum equations can take forms such as m1v1x + m2v2x = (m1 + m2)vx,
and m2v2y = (m1 + m2)vy.
* The student could imply that linear momentum is conserved on both x and y directions, or
conservation of linear momentum procedure is applied to both directions.
* Only stating that linear momentum is conserved or writing down a single equation such as m1v1
+ m2v2 = (m1 + m2)V do not satisfy this rubric.
# Item 3: The student used Pythagorean theorem to find the magnitude of the final velocity.
* The student could write equations such as v_2f^2 = v_2xf^2 + v_2yf^2, or v2f = sqrt(v2xf^2 +
v2yf^2)
* The student could also state that the final velocity is obtained using the pythagorean
theorem, or by taking the square root of the velocity squares.
* The student could also state that the final velocity is the vector sum of the x component and
y component velocities.
* The student could also apply pythagorean theorem directly to the linear momentums, and divide
the final momentum by the mass of the boulders.
* The student could write equations such as (m2v2)^2 = (m2v2x)^2 + (m2v2y)^2

Detailed Rubric 2:

# Item 1: The student considered the x and y components of the linear momentum of the second
boulder separately.
* The student could write down the x and y components of linear momentum of the second boulder
in two separate conservation of linear momentum equations.
* The student could decompose the linear momentum of the second boulder using trigonometry, for
example m_2v2cos(theta), m2v2sin(theta), or mvcos(theta), mvsin(theta) for the second boulder.
* The student could explicitly state decomposing linear momentum of the second boulder into its
x and y components.
* The student could also decompose the velocity of the second boulder into its x and y
components.
# Item 2: The student applied conservation of linear momentum to both the x and y directions
independently.
* Conservation of linear momentum equations can take forms such as m1v1x + m2v2x = (m1 + m2)vx,
and m2v2y = (m1 + m2)vy.
* The student could imply that linear momentum is conserved on both x and y directions, or
conservation of linear momentum procedure is applied to both directions.

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

* Only stating that linear momentum is conserved or writing down a single equation such as m1v1
+ m2v2 = (m1 + m2)V do not satisfy this rubric.
* The student could write down one conservation of linear momentum equation, and either
immediately or later indicate that this equation is applied to both x and y directions.
# Item 3: The student used Pythagorean theorem to find the magnitude of the final velocity.
* The student could write equations such as v_2f^2 = v_2xf^2 + v_2yf^2, or v2f = sqrt(v2xf^2 +
v2yf^2)
* The student could also state that the final velocity is obtained using the pythagorean
theorem, or by taking the square root of the velocity squares.
* The student could also state that the final velocity is the vector sum of the x component and
y component velocities.
* The student could write equations such as (m2v2)^2 = (m2v2x)^2 + (m2v2y)^2
* The student could also apply pythagorean theorem directly to the linear momentums, and divide
the final momentum by the mass of the boulders.
* The student cannot apply pythagorean theorem directly to p1 and p2, or the linear momentum of
boulders 1 and 2. The pythagorean theorem must by applied to the components of velocity or
momentum.
* Simply stating "obtain the magnitude" of the velocity do not satisfy this rubric.

Detailed Rubric 3:

# Item 1: The student solution decomposed the initial linear momentum of boulder 2 into its x and y
components.
* The student could also write m2v2x and m2v2y in conservation of linear momentum equations
without explicitly decomposing the momentum or the velocities.
# Item 2: The student wrote down conservation of linear momentum equation for both the x and y
directions independently.
* The student could also imply that linear momentum is conserved on both x and y directions
separately, and may not explicitly write down conservation equations.
* Only saying "momentum equation" or "used momentum" does not satisfy this rubric.
# Item 3: The student used Pythagorean theorem to find the magnitude of the final velocity.
* Just saying "put them together" does not satisfy this rubric

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

Appendix B: Mean and Range of Accuracy Metrics for Self-Consistency Runs
Question 1:
Metric
mean
SMD.h1 0.094
match.h1 75.8%
SMD.h2 0.097
match.h2 74.2%
diff.both 14.6%
Macro F1 0.917
QWK
0.9

range
0.08 ~ 0.104
71.9% ~ 79.2%
0.09 ~ 0.104
72.9% ~ 76.0%
13.5% ~ 16.7%
0.91 ~ 0.921
0.885 ~ 0.915

Question 2:
Self-consistency:
Metric
mean
SMD.h1
0.124
match.h1
66%
SMD.h2
0.13
match.h2
68%
diff.both
21.8%
QWK(avg) 0.752
Macro F1 0.818

range
0.12 ~ 0.14
63% ~ 69%
0.12 ~ 0.14
64% ~ 71%
18.0% ~ 26.0%
0.73 ~ 0.77
0.81 ~ 0.82

Self-consistency 2:
Metric
mean
SMD.h1
0.074
match.h1
79.8%
SMD.h2
0.088
match.h2
76.6%
diff.both
10.2%
QWK(avg) 0.878
Macro F1 0.864

range
0.07 ~ 0.09
76.0% ~ 81.0%
0.08 ~ 0.1
75.0% ~ 78.0%
8.0% ~ 14.0%
0.87 ~ 0.89
0.85 ~ 0.87

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

Question 3:
Self-consistency:
Metric
mean
SMD.h1
0.168
match.h1
62.6%
SMD.h2
0.124
match.h2
68.2%
diff.both
27%
QWK(avg) 0.852
Macro F1 0.846

range
0.14 ~ 0.19
56.0% ~ 68.0%
0.1 ~ 0.14
65.0% ~ 74.0%
20% ~ 32%
0.82 ~ 0.88
0.83 ~ 0.87

Self-consistency 3:
Metric
mean
SMD.h1
0.156
match.h1
63.8%
SMD.h2
0.1
match.h2
74.6%
diff.both
19.6%
QWK(avg) 0.856
Macro F1 0.846

range
0.15 ~ 0.17
60.0% ~ 66.0%
0.09 ~ 0.11
70.0% ~ 78.0%
17.0% ~ 22.0%
0.85 ~ 0.87
0.84 ~ 0.85

System message:

Appendix C: Prompt for feedback generation.

You are a college introductory level physics teacher who writes kind and concise feedback to
students based on the following information: the problem body, the student's answer to the problem,
the grading rubric, and the teacher's grading justification.

Human message template:

This is the problem that the student solved:
{ProblemBody}
The student wrote this answer explaining their problem solving process:
{StudentAnswer}
The answer was graded according to this grading rubric:
{Rubric}
You graded the students' answer and wrote the following grading justification:
{GradingText}
Your will write a feedback message to the student following this format:
{Feedback_format}

Feedback Instructions:

* First, briefly summarize the the grading standards, by summarizing the grading rubrics.
** Start with "Partial credit grading for this problem is based on the following aspects:".
Then summarize each rubric, for example:
"First, whether you ...."
"Second, whether your explanation indicated that you...."
"Finally, whether your explanation showed that ...."
* Second, point out what the student did well and what the student failed to demonstrate in the
solution, based on students' answer and the grading justification.
** If a student satisfies one or more rubric items (i.e. receiving a grade 1), acknowledge
that by saying something similar to the following:
*** "You clearly showed that...."
*** "You did a good job explaining that ..."
*** "You mentioned in your explanation that... which I interpreted as ....."
Skip this part if the student solution didn't satisfy any of the rubric items.
** If a student missed one or more rubric items (i.e. receiving a grade 0), point it out by
starting the sentence similar to the following:
*** "However, you did not.... "
*** "However, your explanation did not show that you ...."
*** "However, I don't think that you ...."
** If a student didn't satisfy any of the grading rubrics (i.e. the grade is 0,0,0), say
for example:
*** "Unfortunately, your explanation didn't indicate any of the aspects above."
*** "Unfortunately, I don't think your explanation mentioned any of the aspects listed
above."
* Finally, tell the student "if you have any questions regarding the grading, do not hesitate
to reach out to your teacher."
* Limit the feedback to this problem, and do not give any study suggestions such as read a
certain book chapter.
* Also, do not mention words such as "rubric items", since students have not seen the rubric.

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

Appendix D: Instructions provided to students during the exam
Question 1:
Please explain:
1. Which physics principle, if any, did you use in your reasoning?
2. Why do you think the physics principle can be applied in this situation.
3. Explain the steps of your reasoning on how you reached your conclusion.
Question 2 and Question 3:
Please explain the approach that you took to solve the problem above. Your explanation will be used by the course
graders to assign partial credit to you after the exam. (You will not upload a written solution after the exam).
Note: The instructions for this problem is slightly different from previous ones.
To be considered for partial credit:
1. Your explanation CANNOT contain any numbers, but can contain math symbols such as F_x, N, k. Please do
not use the equation editor since it messes up the output.
Your explanation should explicitly contain all of the following information:
1. What variable was the problem asking for and what are the given information? (For example, I'm solving for
the final y component velocity of a projectile motion, given the initial height h, velocity v, and launch angle theta).
This ensures that the TA understands your notations.
2. For this problem, explain how many stages did you break the process into, and which conservation law is
applicable in each stage and why.
4. For each step, explain:
a. What physics principle or equation did you use? (For example, Newton's first/second law of motion, or
definition of kinetic energy)
b. What quantity did you find and how? (For example, I found the normal force by adding all forces on the y
direction)
c. What other key information did you consider (For example, since y-coordinate system is pointing up, gravity
is negative)
Note: Some steps, such as setting up coordinate system or drawing free body diagrams may not have an explicit
outcome
Note: You can write out formulas such as N + (-mg) = 0. Please do not use the equation editor since it messes up the
output.
Note: If you are stuck or not sure how to solve this problem, do not write lengthy explanations on why you are
stuck.

*Contact author: Zhongzhou.Chen@ucf.edu

